# me100-efficient_energy_usage
Final project for ME100 Fall 22.


The energy industry is in the midst of a transition between traditional fossil fuels and renewable energy sources. One of the main challenges accompanying the adoption of renewable energy is that unlike fossil fuels, many renewable energy sources such as wind and solar are intermittently available. In many cases, the availability of renewable power does not correspond to patterns in consumer demand. Currently, the two main solutions are either storing excess power in batteries for later use or switching between renewable and traditional power from the grid. For my project, I wanted to explore how IoT could be applied to improve the second method of energy management. 
The main idea of my project was to utilize the ESP32 to create a ‘smart’ monitor or switch capable of real-time data collection and decision making. Ideally, this would be benefit both homeowners and utility companies by allowing for more efficient energy usage and seamless transitions between the traditional electricity grid and solar power. To model the potential end-usage, I decided to use 2 yellow LEDs, the first powered by a solar panel and the second powered by current from the ‘grid’, which in this case was the output pin of the ESP32. I chose to use the same type of LED for both power sources to reduce potential sources of variable results. Ideally, the circuits for the two LEDs would have been identical, but due to the specifications of the ESP32 output pins and the solar panel, this was not possible. 
The ‘smart’ monitor functioned by using the INA219 to relay information from the solar powered circuit to the ESP32. When the ESP32 detected that the current in the solar circuit dropped below a certain threshold, it drove current to power the other LED. Since LEDs require minimal current to turn on, the threshold current was set very low, but this could easily be adjusted for more energy intensive applications. Throughout the monitoring process, the ESP32 would send information regarding both the solar circuit and the ‘grid’ circuit to my computer via MQTT for later analysis. The collected information was augmented by using weather forecasting data to predict the amount of solar power available on an hourly basis. Once the monitoring period was complete, the relevant data was plotted and displayed so users could visualize and learn from their energy consumption habits. 
There were certain limitations for my project worth noting. Many calculations, such as the predicted voltage of the solar panel, were based on experimental data; the accuracy of this data could be improved by using a larger sample size and a more rigorous analysis and research of solar panel behavior. Additionally, this information will also have to be adjusted based on the solar panels being used. For real-world applications, the secondary power source will generally be the conventional electricity grid. As a result, there will need to be a mechanism to send a signal from the microcontroller to activate or trigger an external power source. Alternatively, it could be possible to utilize MOSFETs so that the low current of the ESP32 can ‘open’ or ‘close’ a gate in a circuit connected to a larger power source. Finally, the analysis of the collected data was relatively simple and could be further expanded upon in the future. 
Despite these limitations, I would consider my project to be successful. The basic principle of using IoT to monitor, analyze, and alter the source of energy consumption was successfully proven. While the demonstration was done for a short amount of time, my project has the capacity to collect data both more frequently and over a longer period. I believe that my design choices were justified given the scope of the assignment and meet all the given requirements. Most importantly, my project clearly demonstrates how IoT can be used to address a relevant real-world problem.
